14 published/00.01 Configuring Quartz 4.0.md, before:

---
alias:
tags:
- published
- index/00.01
---
## Problem with iCloud

Not sure if it's an actual problem but I don't want to copy paste my vault into the content folder every single time I want to make updates. 
I also don't want to have to copy the whole quartz setup in my icloud - I don't know the experience if I try to open vault from a different location, but I already have a feeling it won't be easy.

### workaround

I am not a developer so I don't know shit I'm talking about, but I originally thought changing the `--directory` should be enough. Problem is, it doesn't work. 

(And I may have already burnt hours trying to get it work, sorry, me dumb.)

so... 

[[Git Subtree]] it is.

## setup

My vault is a private vault so I just added it as a subtree:

```git
git subtree add --prefix content https://github.com/janeilagan/digitaljungle.git main --squash
```


And that's it. If I make changes to the vault, that's fine, it's its own repository. I just have to make sure I pull first before I build, then push to the quartz fork:

```git
git subtree pull --prefix content https://github.com/janeilagan/digitaljungle.git main --squash
```
Then for local testings:

```nodejs
npx quartz build --serve
```

## hosting

Following https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/hosting - I created a `deploy.yml` file and used GitHub Pages for Hosting. 

Originally, when I was in a [[wild search for building my garden#^d41417]] using Obsidian Zola, I was hosting my garden via Netlify.

Went back with Quartz and is now back up as https://janeilagan.github.io/digital-jungle/

Commit message:

Squashed 'content/' changes from 3aeb8e8c..a3bf550d
a3bf550d ignore
d3f5a77e add exclusion
763c0689 Update linked thoughts.md
df89ace4 Update 00.01 Configuring Quartz 4.0.md

git-subtree-dir: content
git-subtree-split: a3bf550db4d361ab107dc181d4188460fa468839

14 published/00.01 Configuring Quartz 4.0.md, after:

---
aliases:
  - quartz
tags:
  - published
  - index/00.01
---
## Problem with iCloud

Not sure if it's an actual problem but I don't want to copy paste my vault into the content folder every single time I want to make updates. 
I also don't want to have to copy the whole quartz setup in my icloud - I don't know the experience if I try to open vault from a different location, but I already have a feeling it won't be easy.

### workaround

I am not a developer so I don't know shit I'm talking about, but I originally thought changing the `--directory` should be enough. Problem is, it doesn't work. 

(And I may have already burnt hours trying to get it work, sorry, me dumb.)

so... 

[[Git Subtree]] it is.

## setup

Generated a new repo called `digital-jungle` from quartz template via Github. 

Cloned the repo locally and run `npm i` for local testing.

My vault is a private vault so I just added it as a subtree:

```git
git subtree add --prefix content https://github.com/janeilagan/digitaljungle.git main --squash
```

(I had to manually delete the content folder first.)

And that's it. If I make changes to the vault, that's fine, it's its own repository. I just have to make sure I pull first before I build, then push to the quartz fork:

```git
git subtree pull --prefix content https://github.com/janeilagan/digitaljungle.git main --squash
```
Then for local testings:

```nodejs
npx quartz build --serve
```

## hosting

Following https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/hosting - I created a `deploy.yml` file and used GitHub Pages for Hosting. 

Originally, when I was in a [[wild search for building my garden#^d41417]] using Obsidian Zola, I was hosting my garden via Netlify.

Went back with Quartz and is now back up as https://janeilagan.github.io/digital-jungle/
