14 published/linked thoughts.md, before:

---
alias: here, digital jungle
tags:
- published
- index/00.01
---

Our brain is a network of thoughts and linked ideas, as neurons form intricate connections to store and retrieve information. 

![](https://i.imgur.com/Ov7uZc5.png)

Linking your notes develops a whole web of interconnected knowledge, evolving in to a deeper understanding and relationship of subjects. By linking and establishing associations between thoughts and ideas, you enhance memory recall and ability to retrieve information effortlessly. This practice mirrors the brain's natural thought process.  

## digital gardens and building second brain

My idea of a digital garden is based of [Mental Nodes](https://www.mentalnodes.com/), but this goes a long way back. From the [brief history of digital gardens](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history), it has been around for quite a while now, defying the conventional *personal blogs* that are usually published online. 

Now, there are tons of digital gardens and second brains everywhere. 

Here are some of my favourite ones:

-  [Quartz](https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/) (I almost used this too! [[Configuring Quartz 3.0]])
- [Brandon Boswell’s Garden](https://brandonkboswell.com) (he's got cool contents too!)
- [LYT Kit](https://notes.linkingyourthinking.com) (less is absolutely more)
- [Joschua's Notes](https://notes.joschua.io/50+Slipbox/Welcome!) (his book reviews are amazing)

## my digital jungle

In my [[wild search for building my garden]] in hopes I will end up with the [[best way to take notes]], I stumbled through [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) and had been taking my notes here ever since. 

As this is a jungle, you may find different topics of my interests.

The published version of this digital jungle is powered by [my forked version](https://github.com/janeilagan/obsidian-zola) of [obsidian-zola](https://github.com/ppeetteerrs/obsidian-zola), and [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/) for hosting.

Commit message:

Squashed 'content/' changes from 3aeb8e8c..a3bf550d
a3bf550d ignore
d3f5a77e add exclusion
763c0689 Update linked thoughts.md
df89ace4 Update 00.01 Configuring Quartz 4.0.md

git-subtree-dir: content
git-subtree-split: a3bf550db4d361ab107dc181d4188460fa468839

14 published/linked thoughts.md, after:

---
alias: here, digital jungle
tags:
- published
- index/00.01
---

Our brain is a network of thoughts and linked ideas, as neurons form intricate connections to store and retrieve information. 

![](https://i.imgur.com/Ov7uZc5.png)

Linking your notes develops a whole web of interconnected knowledge, evolving in to a deeper understanding and relationship of subjects. By linking and establishing associations between thoughts and ideas, you enhance memory recall and ability to retrieve information effortlessly. This practice mirrors the brain's natural thought process.  

## digital gardens and building second brain

My idea of a digital garden is based of [Mental Nodes](https://www.mentalnodes.com/), but this goes a long way back. From the [brief history of digital gardens](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history), it has been around for quite a while now, defying the conventional *personal blogs* that are usually published online. 

Now, there are tons of digital gardens and second brains everywhere. 

Here are some of my favourite ones:

-  [Quartz](https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/) (I almost used this too! [[Configuring Quartz 3.0]])
	- Update 2023-09-08: Went back with Quartz - [[00.01 Configuring Quartz 4.0]]
- [Brandon Boswell’s Garden](https://brandonkboswell.com) (he's got cool contents too!)
- [LYT Kit](https://notes.linkingyourthinking.com) (less is absolutely more)
- [Joschua's Notes](https://notes.joschua.io/50+Slipbox/Welcome!) (his book reviews are amazing)

## my digital jungle

In my [[wild search for building my garden]] in hopes I will end up with the [[best way to take notes]], I stumbled through [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) and had been taking my notes here ever since. 

As this is a jungle, you may find different topics of my interests.

The published version of this digital jungle is powered by [quartz 4.0](https://github.com/jackyzha0/quartz) and GitHub Pages.
